In the process of completing project 1, our group encountered a variety of difficulties in several different aspects of the work. We faced technical obstacles with running our chosen software, had problems with clearly understanding the assignment, and experienced some issues with team organization and communication. After meeting together and reflecting on this first phase, we have a better understanding of our individual strengths and weaknesses and have developed a plan to improve our performance and efficiency on the upcoming projects for the semester.

We began this project with the task of evaluating five different project repositories from previous semesters’ teams. Without extensive collective experience using Github, this proved to be more challenging than our team expected. Some of the rubric’s scoring questions were initially confusing until we spent more time researching those questions and understanding Github. For example, we did not know how to check if tests were routinely executed. As we familiarized with Github’s analytical tools, scoring each rubric became easier.

Another type of problem we needed to overcome was team organization and management. Initially we were only meeting briefly after lectures to discuss the project, but we realized we would need a more thorough system for communicating and completing our tasks. We set up a separate Discord server which could fulfill multiple purposes to help the project. Most importantly, we are using the Discord server as a group messaging system, where we can quickly and reliably communicate our ideas and plans. We are also using the channels feature of Discord to organize our work; for example, we are using one channel specifically to store important links, and another specifically to brainstorm bug fixes/new feature ideas.

After deciding on adopting the Burnout repository (https://github.com/deekay2310/calorieApp_server) for the next phase of the project, we began trying to run the application. Burnout is a web application with a Python and Flask backend, and HTML and CSS frontend. The execution guide found in Burnout’s README.md lists five steps: 1) install MongoDB, 2) clone the repository, 3) install required packages, 4) run the python application file, 5) open the localhost address to run the web app. While our main obstacle was step 3, installing dependencies, using the MongoDB database also presented a slight learning curve. Once we spent time reading the MongoDB documentation, we were able to get the database tool running. However, as expected, many of the required dependencies were outdated since the repository had not been updated in two years, and the application did not run. Much of this issue was fixed by simply updating each package to the current release version, but this led to another problem. With updated dependencies, we were able to run the web app, but one of the core functions of the app caused a crash. This was due to one of the dependencies, PyMongo, having changed the names of several functions being used by our code. For example, the “insert()” function had been changed to “insert_one()” in the updated PyMongo version we were now using. Once we refactored the source code to reflect these changes, the bug was solved. Some of the minor features of the app are also not fully implemented, such as displaying a user profile, but they did not cause crashing or prevent us from using the core functionality of the app: daily tracking of calories consumed and burned.

As we wrap up Project 1 and begin work on Project 2, we plan to use the lessons learned from Project 1 to improve our performance going forward. At the management level, we will continue using the Discord server for strong communication, planning, and organization of our resources. We are going to meet in-person on a regular basis as our schedules allow, and virtually when needed. We are going to employ the use of to-do lists for each member and subsequent progress reports on their to-do lists. We are also taking up the practice of scheduling the next meeting at the end of every meeting. At the technical level, we are going to focus on using each tool and language’s documentation to understand our project’s pre-existing code when needed. As we integrate our new implementations into the project, we will also reorganize and reformat the repository and documentation to improve its structure and readability. With these practices in mind we will succeed in the upcoming phases.

